Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we are going to set up a new feature so that subscriber accounts can like or heart
a professor, it's a bit difficult to explain with words.
So let me show you.
OK, so here I am on the home page, but I want to navigate to a professor detailed screen so you can
either jump to a professor by navigating through the programs or just press the key on your keyboard.
And I'm going to search for Professor Bachs a lot.
Cool.
There it is.
Let me visit the detail screen for that professor.
OK, and what I want to do is right about here.
I want to add a little box with a heart icon and then a number indicating how many likes a professor
has received.
And I want to set things up so that you need to be logged in with a subscriber count in order to add
your like to the count.
OK, and we will also implement custom logic so that each user account can only add one like, but they
can click the heart button again to toggle or remove their original like.
All right.
And we can display the total number of likes that a professor has received to the general public.
The reason we are going to work on this feature is because I think it's a great exercise to learn how
to set up your own custom rest API endpoints.
OK, but anyways, let's begin with the visual aspect.
So right now, let's go edit the single professor template so that the little heart box can sit right
here.
So over in our text editor within our theme folder, I want you to open up a single dash, Professor
Dot, OK?
And I want you to find the block where we are outputting the content.
So for me, it's sitting within the div with a class of two thirds.
Right.
That's this area.
OK, and right above this block, let's add a new line and let's create a span element.
And let's give the opening tag a class of like Dasch box, and then within the span, I'm going to drop
down and add several more elements.
So first, let's add a heart icon, so an eye element, and let's give it a class of F.A.A. four font.
Awesome.
Which is our icon library.
Let's give it a secondary class of F a dash heart dash o.
And let's also add another attribute named Ariah Dash hidden and set it to true.
OK, and this will give us a hollow or outlined heart icon.
And then right below this element, I want to add another icon of a filled in heart.
So just duplicate this I element copy and paste and for the second one just remove the dash o on the
secondary class.
So simply f a dash heart.
OK then blow this icon.
Let's create another span and let's just make up a fictitious number of how many likes it's received.
I will say three.
And let's give this element a class of like Dasht Count.
OK, so let's go ahead and save this.
And if we refresh.
Cool, there we see the little heart box, and if the current user has already liked the professor they're
viewing instead of a hollow outline of a heart, it would be a solid filled in heart.
Don't worry, we will set up that detail a bit later on.
OK, so now that we've taken care of the visual aspect of this feature, let's focus on the data aspect.
Right.
The question becomes, how are we going to save these likes into the WordPress database?
Well, there are a lot of different ways you could do this, but I'm just going to create a new custom
post type and give it a name of like and each individual like post will represent a one to one relationship
between the ID number of the current user and the ID number of the Leicht professor.
So without any further ado, let's go create a brand new custom post type.
We've been through this before.
We know what to do.
So over in the text editor, instead of our theme folder, let's jump into the M.
You must use plugins folder.
And we've got this file where we register our custom post types.
I'm going to scroll down to the very bottom and I'm just going to use the note post type as a copy and
paste duplicate.
Copy that, duplicate it.
Let's change the comment to say like post type, change the short name or variable name to like.
OK, and now here's the important part of what's making this feature unique from the My Notes feature.
This ability to like professors is going to require us to implement quite a bit of custom logic.
Right.
Each user can only like a professor once.
And we will also want to make sure that the idea that they say they are liking is actually a professor
post and not a campus post or a blog post.
So long story short, what I'm getting at here is this is not just a simple case of crud, right.
Of create, read, update and delete.
That's a part of it.
Yes.
But there's also going to be a bit of custom logic that we need to enforce.
And when that's the case, when you need to implement your own custom restrictions and logic, I don't
like to use the built in rest API endpoints.
Instead, I like to create my own brand new custom endpoints.
And I also like to take care of permissions manually by myself.
So for this new like post type, I'm going to delete the show and rest line.
You could set this to false, but that's not necessary because it defaults to false.
So if we just delete, show and rest.
All right.
And also we do not need capability type or map meta cap because we are going to handle permissions on
our own when it comes to the like post type.
So I'm going to delete these two lines.
OK, moving on.
When it comes to the supports array, we do not need the editor feature.
We literally just need title.
Let's keep public set to false and let's keep sho UI set to true.
Then let's go ahead and update the label values.
So to save some typing, I'm just going to highlight the base of the word not notes but just note and
then I can press command or control D to select the next few instances, then just type the word like
once and it updates in all locations.
You don't need to do that.
But it's a nice little trick if you're using sublime text or atom.
OK, and finally, let's update the menu icon to dash ACoNs dash.
Part.
OK, now let's go ahead and save this and then let's jump to a window where we are logged in as the
admin account and jump into the dashboard.
And if you refresh.
Now in the sidebar, we have links now in the future, once we've written all of the necessary JavaScript,
you will be able to come to a professor page.
And when you click on the heart box, that will create a like post.
Now, obviously, we have not written all of that in JavaScript yet.
So for the moment, let's cheat and let's use the backend to manually create a lightpost just as a test.
So in the admin, hover over likes and click add new.
Now there are a lot of different ways we could set this up.
I'm going to set things up so that whoever is the author of a light post represents the user that's
doing the liking.
And then I want there to be a custom field named Leicht Professor I.D. And obviously that custom field
will store the ID number of the current professor that you're trying to like.
So, for example, whatever the idea of Dr. Bachs, a lot is, OK, so at the moment are like Post does
not have a custom field named Leicht Professor ID.
So why don't we go create one?
So towards the bottom of our sidebar, let's click on Custom Fields and I'm going to create a new group
here up at the top.
Add new.
I will name it liked Professor Idee, and then I need one field, so I will click add field.
Give it a label like Professor I.D. that auto generates this name and for the field type instead of
text, I will choose no.
The field type is not super important.
This will just provide one extra layer of validation.
All right, for required.
I want to be sure to leave it set to know, because later on, when we learn how to programmatically
create a new post with HP, when the new light post is first created for a split second, it will not
contain a Leicht professor ID.
So be sure that required to set to know.
And then let's scroll down to this location box and let's say only show this field group if post type
is equal to and let's choose like.
OK, then we can scroll up and click publish.
OK, and let's go take this new custom field for a test drive, let's create a like post.
So over in the sidebar under likes I will click add new cool and there we see it, the professor I.D..
So I'm going to pretend that I like the doctor barks a lot, Professor.
So I would need to go find the ID for this professor post.
Don't worry, the visitors of our website will not need to do that.
This is just our first little quick test that we are setting up manually.
So let's go find the ID number for Dr. Bachs a lot, or in your case, find the idea of whatever professor
you want to add to like four back in the admin.
If I jump to professors really quick and click on Dr. Bachs a lot, I can see up in the address bar
that that Professor Post has an ID of 104.
So in your case, take note of whatever Professor ID you want to like.
OK, and now with this number in mind, let's go actually create a like post.
OK, so the title of the light post does not matter.
You can even leave it blank and WordPress will generate something for us automatically.
The important part is for Leicht Professor ID, I will say 104 and that's all we need.
So then I will click publish.
And now at this point, let's work on making our front end display real data, right?
So instead of the number three here, the doctor barks a lot.
Lightbox should say one and all of the other professor pages should say zero.
We want this number to reflect the count of relevant like posts.
So to set that up, let's jump back into our text editor.
And instead of our Mbewe Plugins folder, let's jump to the theme folder.
And we should already have open single Professor Dot P p.
And let's do this.
How about right above the span with a class of lightbox?
Right above that.
Let's add a new line and let's drop into P and within the P block.
Let's create a new variable.
We could name it whatever we want.
I'm going to name it like count and let's set it to equal a new instance of the WP query class.
All right.
Within these parentheses, let's build out an array that describes the exact posts that we are looking
for.
So let's say post type and set it to like and then let's add a comma and add a new line and let's say
meta query.
We need to use a meta query because we only want to pull in like posts where the Leicht professor ID
value matches the I.D. of the current professor page that you're viewing.
So to do that, let's set our meta query argument to equal an array and within the parentheses dropdown.
And remember that the meta query is actually an array of arrays.
Each inner array is a filter and you can have multiple.
So within the array will create an inner array dropdown and now within this entire array.
Let me scroll down a little bit.
This is where we provide three things.
A key as a placeholder.
I will set it to equal X.
The second thing we provide is how we want to compare, and the third is the value.
Now, let's fill these out one by one.
So the key is the name of the custom field.
Remember, we named ours liked Professor D for the COMPAR operator.
We are looking for an exact match so we can say single quote equal single quote.
Right.
We're looking for instances where this equals and then for value.
It would be the idea of the current professor that you're viewing.
So we can just say get the ID and that's all we need.
So now we have this query object named like Count.
So now however many total posts this query finds, we just want to output that number into the HTML
right here.
So within our AP file, it scroll down a little bit.
Here's the lightbox span and here's the inner span where we currently hardcoded the number three.
Let's delete that and instead drop into P and let's just echo out the name of our query object, which
is like count.
And then we want to look inside that object with Dasch greater than and we're interested in the property
named found underscore posts.
This will give us the total number of posts that the query found.
And thankfully, this property ignores pagination.
So even if we set posts per page to one or two or three, this property doesn't care.
It's going to give you the absolute total number of posts that match the query.
OK, so with this in place, let's save and then refresh the front end.
Perfect.
And we see one which represents that one like post that we manually created.
And if we visit another professor.
So if I search for yours a lot and visit their page, perfect.
We see zero.
Next, let's set things up so that if the current user has already liked the current professor that
they're viewing, then the heart should be solid and filled in instead of a hollow outline.
Now, before we write P p to check if that is the case or not, let's first review the success that
I've already written for us.
So, for example, if I write, click on the Like Box and choose inspect, here is the overall span
with a class of like box.
And if I give this opening span a data attribute of data, dash exists.
And if.
I give that a value of yes, as soon as I push enter to confirm that change, watch the heart.
It fills up, but if data exists is set to anything other than yes.
Then the heart becomes empty.
OK, so we've already got systems in place that is watching for data exists equals.
Yes.
So now all we need to do is write P P that outputs data exists equals either yes or no.
So let's jump back into our P file and let's do this.
Let's use this query that we just wrote named like Count.
Let's use it as a template in order to save a bunch of typing.
So I'm just going to copy this into my clipboard and duplicate it.
OK, and on this duplicate copy, I'm going to change the variable name to exist.
Query the name.
Doesn't matter, choose whatever you want.
And I'm just going to add one key option to this array.
So it may be before the post type equals like let's add a new line and let's say that the author needs
to equal whatever user is currently viewing the page.
So get current user I.D..
Be sure to include a comma at the end of the line.
OK, so this query object will only contain results if the current user has already liked the current
professor.
So why don't we do this right above this new query?
Let's create a new variable and I will name it exist status.
The name doesn't matter and by default I will set its value to know.
OK then right below this new custom query.
Let's say if if parentheses, curly brackets and for the condition, let's say if they exist, query,
look inside it for found posts and as long as it's greater than zero, this will evaluate to true.
And if it is true, then let's set this variable to equal.
Yes, so exist status equals.
Yes, cool.
So now we've got this variable that will equal yes or no and now down within the H html for the like
box on the overall opening span tag, let's just say data dash exists equals and then drop into P p
and just echo out the contents of our existing status variable.
All right.
Now if we go ahead and save that and refresh the page, it makes sense that the heart is hollow on the
doctor miaows a lot page because I haven't liked this professor yet.
But if I jump back to the Bachs lot page and you might need to refresh to clear your browsers immediate
cache.
But cool, there we see that the heart is filled in and that's going to bring this lesson to a close.
In our next lesson, we will work on JavaScript so that when you click on the like box, we send out
a request to a custom rest API endpoint to either create a new like post if you haven't already like
the professor or if you have already liked the current professor.
If you click on the box, we would interpret that as a request to remove your like, in which case we
would delete the relevant like post.
Should be a lot of fun to set up.
So let's keep things rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.